# Miscellaneous
## Introduction
Contained herein is a group of assignments associated with my Java-101 experience. The following folder includes things such as the first program I had ever written, and not suprisingly the second one as well (ha ha). My initial evaluation of my first programming class was based off of a single statement from the professor that really bothered me.

"Programming is great, it can be anything, you can do anything" - Java-101 Professor

I noticed a severe lack of structure in the class's delivery. Core concepts of the language that could of been encased in examples and explained, possibly even provide a barren template for the students so they develop some healthy habits such as where to declare instance, static, final (constants) variables would have been a stellar foot to start everyone off on, but in favor of accomplishing random swing enviornment assignments, the class managed to take us all over the place and leave us (maybe only me) with a million questions. I found the most difficult aspect of programming in college (and this spans the entirety of my education) was the balancing of multiple subjects alongside programming.

The problem of balancing is partially self-inflicted, since by the end of my 3.5 year experience, I had accured over 212 credits and merely only accomplished a bachelors degree.

## Table of Contents
* [Java Programs](##Java-Programs) - Listing and links to individual programs.
* [How to Teach](##How-to-Teach) - After my college experience, I retrospectively look back on how I was taught and how it applied to the real world. I have listed my thoughts on how I would go about educating students on programming from day 1.

## Java Programs
* [Area](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/Area.java) - Demonstrates compile time polymorphism via method overloading.
* [Bingo](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/Bingo.java) - Opens a GUI of two player Bingo game vs a scripted opponent.
* [DistanceTraveled](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/DistanceTraveled.java) - User inputs speed and time traveled, outputs distance traveled. 
* [MagicDate](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/MagicDate.java) - User inputs month/day/year, outputs (month * day) & if = year, then "Its MAGIC!".
* [MethodTest](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/MethodTest.java) - User inputs a String and an int, outputs the int position in the String.
* [MonthlySalesTax](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/MonthlySalesTax.java) - Opens a GUI that helps the user calculate state & county tax.
* [MyFirstProgram](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/MyFristProgram.java) - Outputs "I Like Turtles!".
* [MySecondProgram](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/MySecondProgram.java) - Outputs my name, age, and a double.
* [Payroll](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/Payroll.java) - User inputs an employee's hours worked and hourly payrate, outputs employee's wage.
* [ProgGreatFun](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/ProgGreatFun.java) - Trivial output, designed for introduction to methods and strings.
* [RainFall](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/Rainfall.java) - User inputs rainfall for 12 months in a year, outputs total rainfall for that year.
* [RetailPriceCalc](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/RetailPriceCalc.java) - User inputs a product's wholesale cost and a markup %, outputs retail price.
* [RomanNumerals](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/Star.java) - User inputs a number 1-10, outputs equivalent Roman numeral.
* [Star](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/Star.java) - Outputs a pattern in asterisks *.
* [SumNumbers](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/SumNumbers.java) - User inputs a number, outputs the sum from 1 to that input number.
* [SumofTwoNumbers](https://github.com/Spades86/Undergraduate/blob/master/Java/Java-1/Miscellaneous/src/miscellaneous/SumofTwoNumbers.java) - Trivial summing of two numbers.

## How to Teach
<b>Stick with the Basics</b> - Get your students coding immediately, so they can better appreciate what coding is. Keep that code very simple such as "Hello World". Possibly use JGRASP for this initial introduction (ensure it is pre-installed on a school lab  computer). Keeping the first day or so 100% focused on making an executable line of code so the student has a .java file that they have written themselves is important for the next step.

<b>IDE / Java SDK / Paths/</b> - Taking a huge step back from coding and teaching students where they will write and build code and why they should do it there is a fundemental step in achieving clarity. Do not use simple IDE's like JGRASP; making the initial learning process increasingly burdensome will not result in a more proficient coder. Utilizing modern IDEs that are actually utilized in the industry such as Eclipse or IntelliJ not only provides the student with larger custimization potential, but also syntax assistance (after two semesters of JGRASP and finally exposing myself to Eclipse, I was disappointed and angry to say the least).

Ensure the entire installation process is visualized and described step-by-step. The assumption that students know why they are installing this software or that the process is trivial is a serious mistake on the teacher's part. Upon installation completion, walk them through pathing the Java JDK and importing their .java file into a project.

Now that you have an actual file to work on in your new IDE, have them append something simple to their code and show them how to save it. After that, the real educational process of exploring the features of the IDE such as preferences, formatting, dictionaries, plugins, autocomplete, ect... must be covered. Forgoing this process, however simple it may seem to an experienced professional is a critical failure that the student has to deal with. Coding without going through this, is like trying to outfit a kitchen when the house is not constructed yet. Final note on this: Prepare a personal template of how to setup these settings and explain why you want your students to configure them your way for now (STRUCTURE).

 * <b>SonarLint</b> - Given how much there is to teach someone when introducing them to coding, having a supplemental instructor looming over their shoulder and pointing out every mistake without missing a beat should be every professor's #1 on their wishlist. SonarLint will do just that and while instructing the installation of it, teach your students to interact with the squid rules and if they cannot interpret why their code is underlined, they have you to provide clarity. This tool actually assists the professor by creating a cue for students to know to ask questions ("blue line?! help!").

<b>GitHub / GitBash / EGit</b> - Before continuing with the fundementals of Java programming, organizing your students' futures should be your next step. The sort of organiziation and presentation that GitHub provides is imperative for any young budding programer to understand and utilize. If the purpose of your course is to make sure your students have coded something then disregard and waste their time, but if the purpose is to mold the future workforce and help them present a portfolio so they may get hired then skipping this step is off the table.

 * First, run them through creating a GitHub account while explaining what it is (online cloud-based version control / portfolio). Explain why version control is valuable and how it will be an integral part of their everyday lives as a developer. Have them create a repository titled something like "Undergraduate" and start a README.md file in it.

 * Second, have them install GitBash. Industry is notorious for using this Unix-based tool to interact with Github. During this installation process, taking the time to explain what pulling, committing, pushing, fetching, merging are is vital. Have the students pull their repository and then import that repository into eclipse (not as a project). 

 * Third, have them move their initial project into the repository. Last but not least, commit and push this updated repository to GitHub. Explaining what they are actually doing every step of the way with visuals like flowcharts would be helpful.

 * Fourth, is to finally get back to actually coding, but we must provide our students structure, and having a publicly exposed repository that contains a sort of extended template of what a .java file should look like and then even more advanced templates of subclasses with extends and implements included will go a long way to keeping your students on the metaphorical rails. Killing two birds with one stone, we can teach our students something more about version control with the introduction of forking this repository and going through the import process again with GitBash. After all of that, holding a class for walking them through a particular template contained in their new found forked repository will set them up for a lifelong learning process. 

 * Optional fifth step is to introduce your students into Eclipse's EGIT to help streamline the process of adding changes to GitHub. I would recommend doing this later in the semester after familiarity with GitBash is achieved (this is for industry purposes).

<b>Fundamentals</b> - In order to provide your students with a strong foundation, their first semester should be structured around the concepts of Java (assignements should reflect the implementation of these concepts). For example, the differences between variables, such as primitives and object references (along with objects); where you can declare them and why you should put them in certain places. Other examples being: abstract classes, inheritance, parent classes, constructors, loops, recursion, documentation (commenting)...

<b>History</b> - The first semester should only establish the foundations; I would recommend ignoring larger projects in favor of spending time exploring the history of programming. Having them write a program that spits out information on the history of Java or other languages would be a great example of dual-purposing two different forms of teaching. Most importantly, you should communicate the value of programming in society by how it has evolved in both implementation and how code is written nowadays. Big picture perspectives such as how development teams work together and the practices they use to achieve working products for their customers are also advised. 

<b>The Goal</b> - By the end of the course, students should have a few projects, along with the forked template repository (that should also include directions how to resetup everything you went through during the semester, should they forget or have some issues), a firm understanding of the tools they need in order to write executable code, an appreciation for version control with GitHub and GitBash, historical background on the history of programming, and a grasp on core concepts of Java. Future semesters can build off of this solid foundation and can be rest assured that students will have far fewer questions moving forward with all of the structure the first semester built up for them.
